---
date: 2023-05-19
title: "Digital Identity Hack – Introduction to SSI presentation"
linkTitle: "Digital Identity Hack –Introduction to SSI presentation"
description: "In this blog, we discuss about the Digital Identity Hack event, which focused on unlocking the potential of self-sovereign identity technologies in revolutionizing the financial landscape."
author: Pekka Kaipio
resources:
  - src: "**.{png,jpg}"
    title: "Image #:counter"
---

The rise of **self-sovereign identity** (SSI) presents a groundbreaking
opportunity for progress and expansion in the financial sector, with the
capacity to reshape digital financial services, simplify transactions, and
facilitate seamless interactions. To capitalize on this potential, OP Lab and
the EU funded Powered by Blockchain project organized a seminar day and online
hackathon, exploring the innovative power of SSI technologies and institutional
decentralized finance, setting the stage for **a safer, more inclusive, and
efficient worldwide financial ecosystem.** 

At the seminar event, participants engaged in a panel discussion centered on
blockchain projects and **a presentation delving into self-sovereign identity**.
In the following section, we will examine the essential insights and highlights
that emerged from the SSI presentation.

## Introduction to Self-Sovereign Identity

{{< youtube-wrapper utNq_IsH_Y4 939px 649px >}} <em>Harri Lainio presentation:
Introduction to Self-Sovereign Identity</em>

In the event day presentation on Self-Sovereign Identity, **Harri Lainio from OP
Lab** introduced SSI, its potential impact on the world, and Findy Agency
open-source solution for implementing it. The speaker highlighted the power
dynamics of the current digital identity model, which has centralized power in
the hands of a few online platforms. In the next evolution of the internet,
**Web 3, aims to shift power back to individuals** and things, thus empowering
users to take control of their digital identities. 

Learn more about Findy Agency [here](https://findy-network.github.io/).

### Take Control of your Identity 

**SSI offers the promise of an internet where individuals are sovereign,
building their own networks, and serving as the roots of these networks.** By
examining the incentives for SSI, the speaker noted that humans are cooperative
but inherently distrustful, making the exchange of value challenging.
Institutions like banks and governments have historically reduced uncertainty,
but the speaker questioned whether there are alternative ways to achieve this.
He acknowledged that blockchain technology has solved some issues, such as
double spending, but still has a long way to go. 

The speaker emphasized that SSI is about putting the user at the center of their
digital identity: ***"I want to be in the center. And that's something that SSI
promises to handle."*** By empowering individuals to take control of their
digital selves, SSI has the potential to reshape the internet and transform the
way people interact and exchange value online. 

### Root of Trust 

As the presentation progressed, the speaker highlighted that new digital
identities could be represented by leveraging real-world entities while
maintaining clarity and trustworthiness. He touched on the idea of using **FIDO2
authenticators as a "root of trust"** and the importance of flawless one-on-one
mapping between the digital and real worlds. 

Find more information about the FIDO2 [here](https://fidoalliance.org/ ).

### Placing the User at the Heart of Trust

{{< imgproc trust-triangle.png Fit "939x649" >}} <em>The trust triangle</em> {{<
/imgproc >}}

The speaker introduced the concept of verifiable credentials and decentralized
identifiers based secure communication protocols, as well as the trust triangle,
which consists of an issuer, holder, and verifier. He explained that the
verifier's trust in the issuer is crucial, and that the current technology
should be able to handle it. The presenter mentioned the Findy Agency they have
been working on and encouraged the audience to explore and improve upon their
open-source solutions.

In a memorable quote from the presentation, Harri said, ***"And with the help of
cryptography, we can build a better or at least more interesting world, digital
world."*** By pushing the boundaries of SSI and digital identity, the speaker
envisions a future where individuals have greater control over their digital
selves and the information they share.

## Project and event information 

**OP Lab** arranged the seminar day in Oulu, Finland, and the two-week online
hackathon during February in collaboration with Powered by Blockchain project.
**Powered by Blockchain** project is a collaboration project between University
of Vaasa, University of Oulu, University of Lapland and Kajaani University of
Applied Sciences. The project is funded by the European Social Fund.  

Find more information about the project
[here](https://www.uwasa.fi/en/tutkimus/hankkeet/tehoa-lohkoketjuista-koulutushanke).
