---
date: 2023-05-23
title: "Digital Identity Hack Part 2 – Panel Discussion on Blockchain Projects"
linkTitle: "Digital Identity Hack Part 2 – Panel Discussion on Blockchain Projects"
description: "In this blog, we discuss about the Digital Identity Hack event's panel discussion, which focused on exploring development of blockchain projects in various companies."
author: Pekka Kaipio
resources:
  - src: "**.{png,jpg}"
    title: "Image #:counter"
---
The emergence of **self-sovereign identity** (SSI) offers a revolutionary
opportunity for innovation and growth in the financial world, potentially
transforming digital financial services, streamlining transactions, and enabling
seamless interaction. To harness this potential, OP Lab and the EU-funded
Powered by Blockchain project recently held a seminar day and online hackathon
to investigate the disruptive capabilities of SSI technologies and institutional
decentralized finance, paving the way for **a more secure, inclusive, and
efficient global financial ecosystem.** 

During the seminar, attendees participated in a panel discussion on blockchain
projects and a presentation exploring self-sovereign identity. The following
section will delve into the key insights and highlights from the panel
discussion.

## Panel Discussion on Blockchain Projects 

{{< youtube nygxmT3dN-g >}}
<em>Panel discussion on blockchain projects</em>

On the event day, a panel of experts, Pekka Kaipio from [OP
Lab](https://op-lab.fi/), Jani Partanen from [Joisto Oy](https://joisto.com/),
Sandun Dasanayake from [Q4US](https://q4us.dev/), and Rainer Koirikivi from
[Interjektio](https://interjektio.fi/), shared their insights into the world of
blockchain. The panel was moderated by Laura Vuorenoja from OP Lab, and the
discussion centered on the **challenges of blockchain projects**, the lessons
learned, and the potential of blockchain technology for digital identity. 

Blockchain projects present unique challenges, with the panelists highlighting
issues such as the **complexity of the technology, regulatory hurdles, and the
difficulty of building consortia**. To overcome these challenges, the experts
emphasized the importance of educating stakeholders about blockchain's potential
beyond cryptocurrencies and selecting the right use cases for blockchain
technology. 

The panelists also touched on their experiences with blockchain projects in
various industries. Topics covered included the **digitization of real estate
trading, the facilitation of parcel information sharing across European
entities, and the secure storage of document integrity and provenance**. These
examples demonstrated the versatility and growing importance of blockchain
solutions in the modern tech and business landscape. 

### Exploring Identity Management 

One of the focal points of the discussion was digital identity management on
blockchain. The panelists explored the **need for decentralized identity
systems** to improve the scalability of blockchain networks. However, they noted
that many current projects still rely on centralized identity systems or
traditional public key infrastructure. 

### Regulatory Challenges in the Blockchain Sphere 

Panelists agreed that the **General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)** has been
one of the most significant regulatory challenges they have faced. While the
GDPR aims to protect users' privacy, it sometimes limits how blockchain can be
utilized, even necessitating the removal of certain platform functionalities. In
the financial sector, **KYC (Know Your Customer)** and **AML (Anti Money
Laundering)** are the most obvious challenges that need to be implemented
properly. 

### The Importance of Open Source 

Many blockchain projects are built upon open-source technologies like
Hyperledger Fabric. Panelists highlighted the importance of open-source
contributions in **advancing blockchain technology and fostering a spirit of
collaboration** within the community. While not all panelists' companies have
made code contributions, they have shared knowledge and participated in meetups
and user groups. 

### Effective Talent Sourcing 

Sourcing skilled blockchain talent has proven to be complicated. Panelists
revealed that **growing their own talent through training and education has been
the most effective strategy**. Some have also turned to partnerships with
startups, consultants, or other companies to fill talent gaps. 

### Future Prospects of Blockchain Technology 

The panelists agreed that **blockchain technology shows promise for the
future**, as it matures and becomes more widely adopted. Blockchain's potential
as an infrastructure solution for industries like finance and the emerging
metaverse was also noted. However, the panelists acknowledged that regulatory
challenges and the rise of artificial intelligence (AI) could impact the
technology's trajectory. 

### One Wish for Blockchain 

When asked about their one wish for blockchain, panelists expressed a desire for
**more streamlined regulations, increased adoption, and a broader talent pool**.
They hope these changes will lead to a more decentralized, fair, and
trusted way for people to exchange value and information. 

In conclusion, the panelists emphasized that despite its challenges,
**blockchain has the potential to revolutionize various industries**, including
finance, real estate, logistics, and digital identity management. By sharing
their experiences and lessons learned, the panelists provided valuable insights
to help others navigate the complex world of blockchain technology. 


## Project and Event Information 

**OP Lab** arranged the seminar day in Oulu, Finland, and the two-week online
hackathon in collaboration with the Powered by Blockchain project during
February. **Powered by Blockchain** project is a collaboration project between
University of Vaasa, University of Oulu, University of Lapland and Kajaani
University of Applied Sciences. The project is funded by the European Social
Fund.

Find more information about the project
[here](https://www.uwasa.fi/en/tutkimus/hankkeet/tehoa-lohkoketjuista-koulutushanke).

